---
layout: post
title:  Data Analyses and Data Visualizations of Pokémon Base Stats
author: Michael Okuda
description: What are the strongest Pokémon out there, and how can I know?
image: /assets/images/pokeball.png
---

## Introduction

The purpose of this blog post is to observe the methods I used to find the strongest Pokémon based on their base stats.  This post will go over the following:

- how to create a correlation matrix of the base stats.
- how to sort values based on a specific column/base stat of the data frame.
- how to create data visualizations

For those who are not familiar with Pokémon, a [generation](https://bulbapedia.bulbagarden.net/wiki/Generation#:~:text=If%20you%20were%20looking%20for%20the%20animated%20miniseries%2C,not%20exist%20in%20the%20previous%20generation%20are%20introduced.) is a set of Pokémon games that have specific Pokémon.  For example, generation 5 has the Pokémon Black and Pokémon White games, which have different Pokémon than generation 4.  While data analysis can be done on all the Pokémon, it may be better to analyze Pokémon based on a certain generation.  In this blog post, I will be doing exploratory data analysis on [generation 5 Pokémon](https://pokemondb.net/pokedex/stats/gen5).  I also filter out the legendary Pokémon, which tend to have much higher base stats than other Pokémon and are usually not seen until much later in the game.  The conditions of getting non-legendary generation 5 Pokémon can be met by filtering the data frame with the code below.

```
black_and_white_df = pokemon_df.iloc[494:635]
```

The code used to create all of the tables and graphs can be accessed in the following [Git repository](https://github.com/mokuda2/pokemon) under "pokemon-eda.ipynb."

## Correlation Matrix

A correlation matrix takes the numerical variables and finds the correlation between two variables.  The code below creates a correlation matrix:

```
black_and_white_df.corr()
```



## Sorting Base Stat Values



## Data Visualizations



## Conclusion