---
layout: post
title:  Chapter 1 - Blank
author: Michael Okuda
description: A prologue to my senior year of college
---

## Section 1

In high school, I was considered to be the smartest kid in my grade and graduated as valedictorian.  I served as a class officer for the last half of high school.  I also played the piano competitively and won several state competitions.  People at school and at church knew that I had that talent.  My dad was a stake president throughout my middle school and high school years.  People, at the very least, knew my name.

What I tried so hard to the point of unconsciousness was to hide the fact that I was gay.

My first recollection of when I had some sort of feelings for a guy was when I was seven.  When I was 10, I was a lot more aware that I had feelings for guys.  Growing up, I heard negative stereotypes about gay people.  People said that being gay was unnatural and alien and that people who had those feelings or participated in homosexual behavior would go to hell.  Even though I recognized that I had feelings for guys, I didn’t ever consider myself gay.  I wasn’t a bad person, right?  I didn’t see myself going to hell.  Therefore, I couldn’t be gay.

Growing up, I felt a lot of shame for having these feelings for guys.  It got to the point where I didn’t want anyone to ever know that I had these feelings or even a suspicion of it.  No one could know.  I feared rejection from my family, friends, and peers.  With the way that my parents reacted to other concerns, I took from those experiences that feelings didn’t matter.  As long as I didn’t acknowledge their existence, things would work out.

In addition, my parents didn’t talk about gay people.  My parents rarely talked about anything that could’ve been emotionally vulnerable or charging.  It included Church-related topics like polygamy or black people not receiving the priesthood.  It also included teaching me social norms (like regular communication about being on the same page in a friendship) and sharing personal experiences (like the adjustments of living in a foreign country).  I’m grateful for the physical, spiritual, and financial education and fulfillment they gave, but looking back, I wish I had been taught more about the social and emotional aspects.  Often when I came to them with a concern, I felt like they had a mentality of “it’s not an issue” or “you’ll get over it,” and I often felt like they didn’t care to listen.

…

The gospel of Jesus Christ has had a substantial influence in my life.  I love how people can improve and that it’s possible because of a Savior, whose life, suffering, death, and resurrection are all part of His Atonement.  Because Christ chose to be our Savior and went through all the things mentioned above, He understands us perfectly and makes it possible to return to our heavenly home.  Even as imperfect as we are, we can be forgiven and have the ability to change our thoughts, words, and actions.  It’s comforting to know that despite life’s challenges, someone has gone through exactly what I’ve gone through.  Ultimately, He gives me hope.  Though other people do not understand my circumstances perfectly, I’ve seen and felt Christ’s Atonement through other people and have realized that we have the potential to become like Him.

The purpose of the gospel is to have joy in this life and to return to live with our Heavenly Father and our family in the next life.  Part of living the gospel is making and keeping covenants, including baptism, receiving the Gift of the Holy Ghost, and being sealed in the temple.  They could be viewed as steppingstones, where baptism is the first covenant made before the others.  I knew that in order to be sealed in the temple, I had to be married to a woman.  As a pre-teen and a teenager, it sounded very practical.  Even though I had these feelings for guys, why did feelings matter?  People were supposed to marry the opposite gender regardless of their feelings.

One of the reasons I wanted to go to BYU was because I wanted to be around people who shared similar values and standards as I did.  Kentucky has very few members of the Church, so it was always a bonding experience anytime I found out someone was a member.  I was excited to make those kinds of connections at BYU.

Unfortunately, my expectations and outlook weren’t exactly what I thought they’d turn out to be.  Within the first month of attending BYU, I felt different.  It was the first time that I came to the realization of what it meant to be “Asian.”  I knew that I was of Japanese descent when I was in Kentucky, but it wasn’t something that was consciously on my mind like it was on campus.

BYU is known for its dating culture, where it seemed like people had to look and act in certain ways to be accepted into its culture.  I felt like if I wasn’t dating material, I wasn’t worth associating with.  Even though I grew up in the US my entire life and knew only English fluently, I felt judged because I look different from my peers, even though it wasn’t like I could do anything about my appearance to look like the white kids around me.

Another layer of BYU’s dating culture is that I realized that I didn’t desire the kind of dating I saw there.  In high school, I went on dates, which were fun but nothing like the kind of dates where I saw couples holding hands and kissing.  I had no desire for those things.  With my perspective about how feelings didn’t matter and that I felt rejected as a person because I was part of a race that was considered alien and undesirable, I found it crazy that society thought that people had to know how they felt about each other in order to get married.  Sure, marriage was probably easier when there was common ground in interests and personalities, but in my mind, the gospel said that being sealed in the temple was a steppingstone to our heavenly home—nothing that involved these discriminatory, promiscuous feelings.  I was disgusted when I saw couples holding hands and kissing, and I usually walked away from those situations.  When people asked me about my dating life, I made the excuse that I wasn’t going on dates because I was going on a mission, which I did after one year of college.

…

My mission in Seattle was one of the most challenging yet one of the most rewarding things I’ve ever done.  At the beginning of my mission, I had the same mentality of “feelings don’t matter.”  As long as I did what I was supposed to, God would provide miracles.  I’d teach and baptize people.  I’d be happy, which to me meant that I wouldn’t have to deal with feelings.  However, I realized that these expectations I had put on God weren’t necessarily always promised.  Adjusting to missionary life was extremely difficult.  I felt anxious.  I felt depressed.  People were rude to us.  Those experiences further made me believe that feelings were an obstacle to living the gospel.

As I approached things in a state of mind where I didn’t care about my own feelings or the feelings of others, everything backfired.  My anxiety and depression worsened.  It got to the point that even being around people in the grocery store made me feel anxious.  It was difficult for me to talk to people, but I continued to suppress and ignore my feelings because who cared if I was scared or depressed?  I continued to believe that if I did what I was supposed to do that somehow these feelings would go away.

As I got further into my mission, I questioned a lot about the dichotomy of feelings and doing things matter-of-factly.  If the Book of Mormon were true, who cared what people thought about it, whether good or bad?  And why did we teach people about feeling like it was true?  In some ways, I felt that the Book of Mormon was true because of experiences I’ve had, but if people didn’t have feelings, they wouldn’t oppose something where feelings didn’t matter.

When Adam and Eve were in the Garden of Eden, they were given two commandments: to not partake of the fruit of the tree of knowledge of good and evil and to multiply and replenish the earth.  Both were contradictory.  In order to multiply and replenish the earth, they had to partake of the fruit.  However, if they did partake, they would experience sorrow, pain, and death.  Their immortal bodies would become imperfect, and they would be cast from the presence of God.  Sure, we wouldn’t be here if they hadn’t partaken of the fruit, but wouldn’t it have been better to be ignorant of feelings and to all live in the presence of God?

One of the turning points of my mission was during a lesson I taught with the bishop, his wife, and their two friends.  The friends were some of the nicest people I had met on my mission, but they weren't sure if they wanted to meet with us after teaching a couple of lessons.  The bishop and his wife were able to express love and care that close friends could do that two mere missionaries couldn't about why we shared the gospel to people.  Their interaction changed the way I viewed building relationships with people.  Even though I dropped the two friends from our teaching pool, it didn't drop our relationship with them.  I occasionally visited them, and they were so inviting to allow us in and talk.

As I learned what it meant to love the people, my mission became more fulfilling.  It didn’t mean that the rest of my mission was void of challenges, but learning how to build relationships with people out of love instead out of duty completely changed the way I approached missionary work and the way that I interacted with people.

...

When I finished my mission, I knew that the next steppingstone in the gospel was dating and marriage.  Like many other LGBTQ people, I thought that my feelings toward guys would go away.  They obviously didn’t.  At the same time, I was hoping to keep in contact with the missionaries I had served with.  Even though many of them would go to BYU, it was difficult keeping that connection with them.

As the school year after my mission continued, I felt like dating and marriage weren’t things for me in this life.  I knew that my goal to live with Heavenly Father meant that I had to get married to a woman, so maybe it would happen in the next life.  I had no interest in dating girls, mostly because I had no desire for women but also partly because of the social exclusion I felt from BYU’s dating culture.  I still didn’t understand why people who termed their feelings “romantic” made such a big deal about it.  To me, I felt like they were the reasons why people didn’t want to associate with me.

Eventually, I made up my mind that I had no expectation to marry.  It meant that I didn’t have to worry about kids.  I could solely focus on my career.  Observing that the friends and connections I had made in Kentucky and on the mission seemed nonexistent, I didn’t see the point of making friends and connections at BYU because the pattern would continue after graduating; they would all be gone.  I saw the importance of networking with people to further my career, but other than that, I didn’t have a desire to connect with people on an emotional level.  Looking back in retrospect, my lack of desire for dating and marriage greatly affected my interactions and relationships with others.  I’ve noticed that some of the people who got to know me during that time of my life could sense that I didn’t see the point of getting to know them on an emotional level.

...

During the summer of 2022, my parents began their three-year mission as mission president and wife in the Micronesia Guam Mission.

Also during that summer, I reconnected with a mission friend at a mission reunion.  Her name is <span style="color:red">Gyuna</span>.  She said she was going to transfer to BYU starting in the fall.

Gyuna and I were pretty opposite people in many ways: personalities, interests, cultural backgrounds, taste in men.  If society thinks that two completely different people can’t be compatible, Gyuna and I definitely broke that norm.  Sure, we had our differences and disagreements, but we learned to get through those moments.

At the beginning of the school year, I still had the mentality that making connections and friends was meaningless.  As Gyuna invited me to do things with her and I took her invitations, I felt something—that feeling of being connected to someone.  I usually hung out with her and her boyfriend Christian.  After some time, Gyuna and I became really good friends.

_(October 2022; college junior) Even though it was great getting to hang out mostly with Gyuna and also Christian, I realized that I was starting to feel social withdrawals for the past month. I noticed that on days that I didn’t hang out with Gyuna, I felt pretty sad and lonely. I didn’t really hang out with anyone else. Sure, I had my research teammates and the TAs in the stats lab and some of my classmates, but it wasn’t like I did anything outside of school with them._

_Initially, I got really scared that I was feeling these social withdrawals. I felt like maybe I needed to break off ties with Gyuna. I was still skeptical trying to develop connections and relationships with people because who knew when Gyuna and I wouldn’t be friends anymore? Then what would be the point of all of it? If I were to break off ties with her now, then maybe I wouldn’t worsen the hurt._

_But something made me feel like I shouldn’t give up. Honestly, I couldn’t imagine what it would’ve been like to have a life like I did last school year: studying at the LSB by myself all day, every day. Gyuna, Christian, and I had made so many memories. Nothing was memorable about studying Linux commands or the hypergeometric distribution or the issues of multicollinearity in a regression model other than for exams and my future career. Sure, navigating my career path was very important to me, but something was different about having a social aspect in my life. It was something that I LIKED, and I was initially scared that I liked feeling that way. It had been years since I last felt like I had a social life._

Around this time, I had many thoughts about my expectations for dating and marriage.  I noticed a sort of fulfillment that Gyuna and Christian had in a relationship, one I got to see more closely since I felt like most couples didn’t want to associate with me.  The feelings that they shared and the way they interacted with each other were things that I could’ve potentially seen myself with a guy, even though that wasn’t allowed at BYU.  I was still scared to admit that to myself too.  But as I began to pay more attention to my feelings, I sensed that living to be single for the rest of my life would be miserable, even impossible.  I knew that I was supposed to date and marry a girl, but I wondered what dating a guy would be like.  I knew it was a risk because dating someone of the same gender was largely looked down upon at BYU and could lead to disciplinary action if told to the wrong people.

At the time, I still didn’t even know what it actually meant to go on a “date” with someone.  My parents taught me that a date was when a guy and a girl plan to do something and then do it.  They didn’t talk about the emotional aspect of dating.  I prayed and prayed to know if dating guys was a decision I should make.  Eventually, I felt that if it wasn’t right that God would let me know.  I loved how the gospel could allow me to change so that if dating guys was the wrong decision, I didn't have to go back down that path again.

…

I met my first guy on a dating app after about a couple of weeks.  When I told him that I hadn’t come out to anyone, he was surprised and expressed how difficult that must have been.  I told him that I wanted to see what dating guys was like and that if it wasn’t right that I could just revert back to pretending like my feelings for guys didn’t exist.  As he and I talked, I realized how relatable his experiences were to mine.  I talked to him about Gyuna, and he suggested that she would be a good person to come out to.  Initially, I was hesitant about coming out to her, but as I went on dates with other guys and got to listen to their stories, I felt loved and not alone in this journey.

I eventually came out to Gyuna.

_(November 13, 2022; college junior) Instead of going to my local ward, Gyuna and I decided to go to one of the Asian wards. Church started an hour later than we thought, so we hung out at the JSB taking pictures._

_Afterwards, Gyuna and I went to her place. She planned on cooking for a bunch of Korean people she had met the past week. I sat on the couch while she took out her cutting board and knife._

_“Michael, you were so cute in those pictures!” she exclaimed. “Why don’t you go get yourself a wife? And again, you can adopt me. I’ll cook for you all the time, and I’ll make purchases on Amazon all day.”_

_Ever since Kent and I had that conversation at the library about coming out to someone, I thought a lot about Gyuna. And when I went to Gyuna’s place before my date just a couple days ago, I felt strongly impressed to come out to her. It kept coming to mind. But I was SO scared!_

_It was even weirder that Gyuna had brought up about my fake future wife. I didn’t know how to come out to her. “Uh...” I said._

_“What?”_

_I sighed._	

_“What?? You look like something’s on your mind.”_

_My heart raced. “Yeah,” I nervously chuckled._

_“Are you gonna tell me?”_

_“I will.”_

_“When? Like, in a week? Or right now? Do you have to think about what you’re going to say?”_

_“Yeah, I just need to think about how to say it.”_

_Gyuna continued to chop some vegetables. “I’m just saying, once you get yourself a girl you’ll fall in love with, you’ll understand.”_

_For five minutes, my heart was racing like crazy. I just needed to open my mouth and say it! “So...”_

_Gyuna continued chopping. “Huh?” she asked as if I had said something more._

_I sighed and squirmed. Why couldn’t I do it?!_

_“So... I actually like guys.”_

_It was silent for about three seconds. With a surprised expression on her face, Gyuna paused and looked up at me. The tense silence felt like FOREVER. “What?” she asked as if she misheard me._

_“I like guys,” I repeated. I was SO nervous._

_“Aw, Michael.” She put down her knife. “I think I should give you a hug.” She walked over and gave me a long hug._

_“I’ve been so scared,” I said as she and I continued to hug. “I’ve wanted to tell you this, but I was so scared. You’re the first person I’ve come out to. Literally I haven’t told anyone else.”_

_“Really?!” Gyuna sounded surprised. “I feel so honored! I can’t believe that after all the days of class I’ve missed and all the help I’ve needed on our data science labs that I’d be the first one to know something so personal like this. No one has ever come out to me. So it’s my first too!”_

_“It’s my first, and it’s your first. It’s our first!”_

_Gyuna and I laughed. “Sounds weird, but yeah,” she said. “Oh, Michael! Your lips are twitching so much. And your fingers!”_

_“I know, I’m so freaking nervous! I’ve had these feelings for guys for a long time, but I’ve always suppressed them. After my mission, I thought I was going to live single for the rest of my life.”_

_“Aww, Michael! That’s really sad!” Gyuna exclaimed._

_“When I got my internship offer at AT&T, I thought that if I liked the job and received a full-time offer that I’d move to Dallas and work and then do whatever at home by myself. But I’ve realized that I can’t live a life like that forever. It would be so hard, maybe even impossible. I know that faith and feelings can seem like polar opposites, but I don’t feel like it’s a black-and-white thing where I can choose only one and leave the other behind. I don’t plan on leaving the Church until the Church kicks me out. The thing that’s hard for me to understand is why God would allow people to have feelings for the same gender. It’s not something that I have any control over.”_

_“Well, why does God allow someone to murder someone else?” I guess Gyuna was trying to show compassion, although I didn’t feel like her analogy was at the same level. “Love is such a core part of one’s identity. It’s definitely a difficult situation when it comes to feelings of love.”_

_Gyuna and I sat on the couch and talked for an hour. I talked to her about how I had been using dating apps and had been on a few dates. I also talked to her about how much I liked Kent and my date with him._

_After our conversation, Gyuna went back to cooking. I knew I took up a lot of her time, and the people she had invited were coming soon. “Could I help you?” I asked._

_“Yes, please!” she answered. So we made food together as her friends came by._

_After I finished eating, I had plans to go to campus. As I left, Gyuna walked me out. “Be safe!” she exclaimed._

_“I will! I’ll see you later!”_

_Coming out to Gyuna was one of the hardest things I did the past school year. But a feeling of relief came over me. I remembered Kent telling me how hard it must have been not coming out to anyone, and maybe that feeling of relief came from an unknown burden that had been lifted from my shoulders. I don't like to think about what the past school year would've been like if I hadn't come out to her._

Gyuna was the only person I came out to for a couple months.  I went to her as I navigated an emotional roller coaster.  I then came out to Christian.  (I also came out to a few other people, but as far as the rest of the reflection, the two of them are relevant.)

Dating guys is so different from dating girls.

As I continued to date guys, I had seen how much I had emotionally and spiritually grown.  The way that straight guys talked about how they felt about dating girls was the same way I felt about dating guys.  Similarly, the way that straight guys felt an aversion to date guys sounded like the way I felt an aversion to date girls.  I never understood what it meant to have a crush on someone because I had suppressed my feelings so much.  Sure, there were physically attractive men, but I never felt the emotional aspect of a crush.  Now I knew what that was like from dating guys.  Being heartbroken was something I never understood until I experienced it myself.  I didn’t get why people put themselves in a relationship, broke up, and then got sad about it.  If they weren’t meant to date or get married, then there must have been someone more compatible, so why be sad about it?

Sexual orientation isn’t just about having sexual feelings for someone.  The way I feel about a guy emotionally, spiritually, and intellectually is different from the way I feel about girls.  I might be physically attracted to a guy, but when I get to know a guy and like him more, the combination of emotional, spiritual, intellectual, physical, and other aspects of a healthy relationship is what I consider to be romantic feelings.

I had many questions regarding the Church and its views on LGBTQ people, but I felt like I could empathize with Eve when she partook of the fruit.  She and Adam could’ve lived a life without experiencing sorrow, pain, and death. They could have lived a life where God was always in their presence. But I began to understand why Adam and Eve felt joy. Even though they would experience those emotions of sorrow, pain, and death, there was joy in experiencing mortality and knowing what emotions were. There was joy in being able to empathize and have compassion for others. They were excited to live a life of mortality, even if they were deprived of immortality and living in the presence of God.

Similarly, I felt like I came to a cross in the roads: (1) going through the motions of being sealed to someone and having to put up with each other and our posterity for eternity or (2) going against the norm and dating guys to experience joy in this life with no guarantee of what will happen in the next life.  Much like how Eve expressed the joy that she felt despite having to go through sorrow, pain, and death, I saw good fruit from dating guys despite the unknown.  Each person’s perspective is different, but for me, I wouldn’t want to go through a marriage where I’m married out of duty.  I wouldn’t want my spouse to go through a marriage where I feel that way.  I wouldn’t want children to be raised in an environment where their parents view marriage that way.

After figuring out that I wanted to date guys, I dated around as much as I could to know what qualities I wanted in a future husband.  I regretted all of the times I ignored or dismissed people when they talked about relationships.  The way straight people viewed qualities they looked for were similar to what I wanted as well.

Eventually, I got into a committed relationship with a guy named Bryce.  He and I dated for about two months.  I realized that a long-term relationship was something I desired.  Doing new things together, making memories, wanting to become a better person…  Dating helped me fill a hollow space inside me, and I saw why healthy couples found so much fulfillment in their relationships.  No wonder people made time for relationships, even if being a full-time student kept them super busy.

Eventually, Bryce and I broke up since both of us at one point or another expressed that we didn’t have romantic feelings for each other and that things wouldn’t work out.  Bryce initially said he could see us being friends, but after sitting down and officially breaking up, he said it was too difficult.  That five-minute conversation was the last time I saw him.

After breaking up, I knew that I needed some time to reflect and reevaluate what my dating goals were and what I could do to better myself for whenever my next relationship would be.  Even though dating as a gay man at BYU is scary and isolating, I didn’t regret dating guys at all.  Looking back, I don’t think I’d be on a good path if I didn’t experience the emotions that come from dating and building relationships with others.  A long-term relationship with the right person was one of my greatest desires.

One thing I knew I could do better was to find friends in the LGBTQ community, especially those who also valued the gospel like Bryce.  Many understandably found that there was too much tension between the two.  As I’ve listened to other people’s perspectives, I could relate to the way people felt marginalized and misunderstood because of their orientation.  Even though I’m not publicly out, I’m sure I would receive similar or even worse treatment than I do for being Asian at BYU.  If I could find people who valued being in the LGBTQ community and the LDS community, I wanted to get to know those people.  I felt like they could support me in my journey and I in return.

Another thing I gained from my relationship was being more sure about what I wanted in a relationship, actively striving to fulfill those attributes myself, and then finding someone with those similar attributes.  For example, I value connection—those who like getting to know others, being respectful and mindful of them, and finding ways to serve.  Even though some social situations get me out of my comfort zone, I know that if I want to attract someone with that attribute that I need to work on that myself.

Another thing I knew I could do to become better was to come out to my family.  After realizing that dating guys was the right thing for me, I thought a lot about coming out to my family.  It was daunting to think about though.  I wasn’t sure how they were going to react, but I knew that hiding this part of myself was a barrier to being emotionally vulnerable and close to my family.  It was what I was hiding all while I was growing up, which made me build walls around the walls of that part of me.  Deep down, I wanted to have a good relationship with them.  Plus, I didn’t want to hide that part of my life going into another relationship.  It felt rather conflicting when I was with Bryce.

Writing is my most powerful tool in terms of communicating my thoughts and ideas, so I wrote a reflection over the summer while I was in Guam with my parents and in Dallas for my internship with AT&T.  I knew that coming out was not just a five-minute conversation and that a lot of questions that they might have could be answered from my writing.

I’ve written this chapter to help give context to my family, academic, and spiritual background so that the rest of my reflection is more understandable.  In the next chapter, I pick up where I left off with my previous reflection.  Again, the purpose of this reflection is to share my story so that people can understand more about the LGBTQ community, the LDS community, and the Asian community.  Those three communities are not independent of each other.  They all make up part of my identity.  My hope is to help open the reader’s eyes to different perspectives and how those three aspects of my identity affect my perceptions of myself and the world around me.

(End of Chapter 1...)

Next page -> [Chapter 2: The Meaning Behind a Name](https://mokuda2.github.io/senioryearreflection/2023/04/07/The-Meaning-Behind-a-Name.html)

---

[Introduction](https://mokuda2.github.io/senioryearreflection/2024/05/01/Introduction.html)

[Chapter 1: Blank](https://mokuda2.github.io/senioryearreflection/2024/04/08/Blank.html)

[Chapter 2: The Meaning Behind a Name](https://mokuda2.github.io/senioryearreflection/2024/04/07/The-Meaning-Behind-a-Name.html)

[Chapter 3: Prodigal Father, Prodigal Son](https://mokuda2.github.io/senioryearreflection/2024/04/06/Prodigal-Father-Prodigal-Son.html)

[Chapter 4: State of the Soul](https://mokuda2.github.io/senioryearreflection/2024/04/05/State-of-the-Soul.html)

[Chapter 5: A Spark of Fire](https://mokuda2.github.io/senioryearreflection/2024/04/04/A-Spark-of-Fire.html)

[Chapter 6: A Glance at the Steppingstones](https://mokuda2.github.io/senioryearreflection/2024/03/03/A-Glance-at-the-Steppingstones.html)
